'.\" -*- nroff -*-
.TH FSCK.KAFS 8 "2026-03-15" "kafs 0.3.1" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
fsck.kafs \- check and repair specific KAFS consistency layers
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B fsck.kafs
.RB [ --full-check ]
.RB [ --full-repair ]
.RB [ --balanced-check ]
.RB [ --balanced-repair ]
.RB [ --check ]
.RB [ --repair ]
.RB [ --fast-check ]
.RB [ --fast-repair ]
.I image
.br
.B fsck.kafs
.RB [ --check-journal ]
.RB [ --repair-journal-reset ]
.RB [ --check-dirent-ino-orphans ]
.RB [ --repair-dirent-ino-orphans ]
.RB [ --check-hrl-blo-refcounts ]
.RB [ --repair-hrl-blo-refcounts ]
.RB [ --replay-journal ]
.RB [ --punch-hole-unreferenced-data-blocks ]
.RB [ --trim-free-data-blocks ]
.I image
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B fsck.kafs
validates and optionally repairs selected consistency layers.
By default it runs
.B --check
(equivalent to
.BR --balanced-check )
(journal validation + dirent->ino orphan scan).
.SH OPTIONS
.SS Preset Modes
.TP
.B --full-check
Run all available checks:
journal, dirent->ino orphan scan, and hrl->blo refcount consistency.
.TP
.B --full-repair
Run all available repair actions and checks:
journal reset (if needed), dirent->ino orphan reclaim,
hrl->blo refcount repair, and hrl->blo consistency check.
.TP
.B --balanced-check
Check journal and dirent->ino orphan consistency (default).
.TP
.B --balanced-repair
Repair journal (if needed) and dirent->ino orphans.
.TP
.B --check
Alias of
.BR --balanced-check .
This is also the default when no mode is specified.
.TP
.B --repair
Alias of
.BR --balanced-repair .
.TP
.B --fast-check
Fast journal-layer check only.
.TP
.B --fast-repair
Fast journal-layer repair path (journal reset if needed).
.SS Low-level Options
.TP
.B --check-journal
Low-level flag: validate the journal layer.
.TP
.B --repair-journal-reset
When journal validation fails, reset the journal ring safely offline
(zero data and rewrite header).
.TP
.B --repair-dirent-ino-orphans
Repair the dirent->ino layer by reclaiming orphan inodes
(inodes with link count 0) and releasing their referenced blocks via HRL.
.TP
.B --check-dirent-ino-orphans
Check dirent->ino consistency by scanning orphan inodes
(inodes with link count 0) without mutating image data.
.TP
.B --check-hrl-blo-refcounts
Check ino->hrl->blo consistency by comparing inode-derived expected block
references against live HRL entry refcounts.
.TP
.B --repair-hrl-blo-refcounts
Repair ino->hrl->blo consistency by adjusting HRL refcounts to match
inode-derived expected block references.
.TP
.B --replay-journal
Replay committed in-image journal metadata deltas and clear the journal ring.
This is intended for offline recovery paths.
.TP
.B --punch-hole-unreferenced-data-blocks
Punch holes for allocated data blocks that have no inode-derived references and
no live HRL references, then mark those blocks free in the block bitmap.
.TP
.B --trim-free-data-blocks
Issue TRIM (hole punch) for all currently free data blocks according to the block bitmap.
This does not change inode/link semantics; it reclaims backend space only.
.PP
Preset mode and low-level options cannot be mixed.
With no options,
.B fsck.kafs
defaults to behavior equivalent to
.BR --check
(=
.BR --balanced-check ).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Validation/repair completed successfully.
.TP
.B 3
Journal validation failed.
.TP
.B 4
Journal reset operation failed.
.TP
.B 5
dirent->ino check found orphan inconsistencies.
.TP
.B 6
dirent->ino repair completed with partial failures.
.TP
.B 7
hrl->blo refcount consistency check found mismatches.
.TP
.B 8
Journal replay operation failed.
.TP
.B 9
Punch-hole completed with partial failures.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkfs.kafs (8),
.BR kafs (1),
.BR kafsctl (1),
.BR kafsdump (8),
.BR kafsimage (8),
.BR kafsresize (8),
.BR kafs-info (8)
.SH AUTHOR
kafs project.
