'.\" -*- nroff -*-
.TH KAFS 1 "2026-03-04" "kafs 0.2.3" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
kafs \- FUSE-based KAFS filesystem
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B kafs
.RB [ --image
.IR image ]
.I mountpoint
.RI [ FUSE\ options ]
.PP
.B kafs
.RB [ --image
.IR image ]
.B --migrate-v2
.RB [ --yes ]
.I mountpoint
.RI [ FUSE\ options ]
.PP
.B kafs
.I image
.I mountpoint
.RI [ FUSE\ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B kafs
mounts a KAFS filesystem image via FUSE.
An embedded journal region is used when present. Sidecar journals are not supported.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR "-o multi_thread" "[=N]"
Enable FUSE multi-thread mode and set the worker thread count.
This is translated to the FUSE option
.BR max_threads= .
Aliases:
.BR multi-thread
and
.BR multithread .
If N is omitted, a default is chosen (currently 8) or can be set via
.BR KAFS_MAX_THREADS .
.TP
.BR --trim-on-free , " --no-trim-on-free"
Enable/disable issuing TRIM (hole punch) for data blocks that become free at runtime.
Equivalent FUSE options:
.BR trim_on_free
and
.BR no_trim_on_free .
Default is disabled.
.TP
.B --migrate-v2
If the image format is v2, perform one-shot migration to v3 and exit.
This operation is irreversible.
.TP
.B --yes
Skip interactive confirmation for migration.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B KAFS_IMAGE
Fallback path to image when --image is not specified.
.TP
.B KAFS_JOURNAL
Set to 0 to disable journal even if present.
.TP
.B KAFS_MT
Set to 1 to enable FUSE multi-thread mode (same effect as
.BR "-o multi_thread" ).
.TP
.B KAFS_MAX_THREADS
Default thread count used when multi-thread mode is enabled and N is not specified.
.TP
.B KAFS_TRIM_ON_FREE
Set to 1 to enable runtime TRIM on block free, or 0 to disable.
.TP
.B KAFS_JOURNAL_GC_NS
Group commit window in nanoseconds (default 10000000ns).
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkfs.kafs (8),
.BR fsck.kafs (8),
.BR kafsctl (1)
.SH AUTHOR
kafs project.
