'.\" -*- nroff -*-
.TH KAFSCTL 1 "2026-03-17" "kafs 0.4.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
kafsctl \- runtime control and maintenance utility for mounted KAFS
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B kafsctl
.I command
.RI [ arguments ... ]
.PP
.B kafsctl
.B help
.RI [ command ... ]
.PP
.B kafsctl
.B migrate
.I image
.RB [ --yes ]
.PP
.B kafsctl
.RB { fsstat | stats }
.I mountpoint
.RB [ -v | --verbose ]
.RB [ --json ]
.RB [ --bytes | --mib | --gib ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B kafsctl
is the operational companion to
.BR kafs (1)
and provides:
.IP \[bu] 2
offline image migration (v2/v3 \-> v4),
.IP \[bu] 2
filesystem statistics and runtime diagnostics,
.IP \[bu] 2
hotplug control via the hidden control endpoint
.IR /.kafs.sock .
.IP \[bu] 2
basic file operations on a mounted KAFS tree.
.PP
Most subcommands also support
.B --help
for command-specific usage output.
.B help
can be used as an alias to print the same targeted usage.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B help [command ...]
Print global or command-specific usage.
.TP
.B migrate image [--yes]
Offline pre-start v2/v3\->v4 migration.
This operation is irreversible.
.TP
.B fsstat mountpoint [-v|--verbose] [--json] [--bytes|--mib|--gib]
Print filesystem and runtime statistics.
By default this uses a lightweight snapshot and skips full tombstone and HRL scans.
Use
.B -v
or
.B --verbose
to enable the heavier scans, including tombstone inode count, oldest pending deletion
timestamp, and HRL usage/refsum summaries.
.B stats
is an alias of
.BR fsstat .
.TP
.B hotplug status
Show hotplug status for
.IR mountpoint .
Option:
.BR --json .
.TP
.B hotplug restart-back
Request a supervised back process restart and reconnect.
This targets the restart-back path managed by the mounted front process.
.TP
.B hotplug compat
Show front/back protocol compatibility.
Option:
.BR --json .
.TP
.B hotplug set-timeout
Set the reconnect wait timeout (milliseconds).
.TP
.B hotplug set-dedup-priority
Set dedup worker priority for hotplug back process.
Usage:
.B set-dedup-priority mountpoint <normal|idle> [nice]
.TP
.B hotplug set-runtime
Set runtime policy on mounted KAFS instance.
Options:
.BR --fsync-policy= "" <journal_only|full|adaptive>,
.BR --pending-ttl-soft-ms= "" <ms>,
.BR --pending-ttl-hard-ms= "" <ms>.
.TP
.B hotplug env list mountpoint
List env variables passed to back process on restart.
.TP
.B hotplug env set mountpoint key=value
Set env variable passed to back process on restart.
.TP
.B hotplug env unset mountpoint key
Unset env variable passed to back process on restart.
.TP
.B stat path
Print file metadata.
.TP
.B cat path
Print file contents to stdout.
.TP
.B write path
Write stdin to file (truncate/replace).
.TP
.B cp src dst [--reflink]
Copy a file. When both paths resolve to the same KAFS mount,
.B kafsctl
uses the native copy path; with
.B --reflink
it requests clone-like copy. Otherwise it falls back to the system
.BR cp (1) .
.TP
.B mv src dst
Rename or move a path. When both paths resolve to the same KAFS mount,
.B kafsctl
uses the native rename path; otherwise it falls back to the system
.BR mv (1) .
.TP
.B rm path
Remove file.
.TP
.B mkdir path
Create directory.
.TP
.B rmdir path
Remove empty directory.
.TP
.B ln src dst
Create a hard link when both paths resolve to the same KAFS mount.
Cross-filesystem hard links are rejected.
.B ln
also accepts
.BR -f ,
.BR -n ,
.BR -T ,
.BR -t " dir"
and
.BR -v
for minimal GNU-style compatibility. When the destination names a directory and
.B -T
is not given,
.B kafsctl
creates the link inside that directory using the source basename.
.TP
.B ln -s target linkpath
Create a symbolic link. Only
.I linkpath
is resolved as a KAFS path; the
.I target
string is stored as given.
.B ln --symbolic
is accepted as an alias for
.BR "ln -s" .
.B -f
replaces an existing non-directory destination before creating either kind of link.
.TP
.B symlink target linkpath
Compatibility alias for
.BR "ln -s" .
Only
.I linkpath
is resolved as a KAFS path; the
.I target
string is stored as given.
.TP
.B rsync [rsync options...] src... dst
Run the system
.BR rsync (1)
with path-first arguments. This is a thin wrapper that preserves rsync options,
emits clearer diagnostics when
.B rsync
is unavailable, and leaves path handling to rsync itself.
.TP
.B readlink path
Read symlink target.
.TP
.B chmod octal_mode path
Change mode bits.
.TP
.B touch path
Update file timestamps or create empty file.
.PP
For
.BR stat ,
.BR cat ,
.BR write ,
.BR rm ,
.BR mkdir ,
.BR rmdir ,
.BR cp ,
.BR mv ,
.BR ln ,
.BR symlink ,
.BR readlink ,
.BR chmod ,
and
.BR touch ,
.B kafsctl
now accepts path-first forms and auto-detects the containing KAFS mount when needed.
The legacy forms that take an explicit
.I mountpoint
remain accepted for compatibility during the transition.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR kafs (1),
.BR mkfs.kafs (8),
.BR fsck.kafs (8),
.BR kafsdump (8),
.BR kafsimage (8),
.BR kafsresize (8),
.BR kafs-info (8),
.BR kafs-front (8),
.BR kafs-back (8)
.SH AUTHOR
kafs project.
