'.\" -*- nroff -*-
.TH KAFSRESIZE 8 "2026-03-04" "kafs 0.2.3" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
kafsresize \- grow offline KAFS image logical block range (grow-only)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B kafsresize
.B --grow
.B --size-bytes
.I N
.I image
.br
.B kafsresize
.B --migrate-create
.B --dst-image
.I image
.RI [ --size-bytes " " N ]
.B --inodes
.I I
.RI [ options ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B kafsresize
performs grow-only resize for an offline image.

It also supports creating a migration target image with new geometry
(size/inode count) via
.B --migrate-create
for cutover workflows.

When
.B --src-mount
and
.B --dst-mount
are provided, the suggested cutover workflow prints an initial seed
copy plus a final rsync command using
.B --inplace --no-whole-file
to reduce re-transfer and rewrite volume before the final switch.

Current v0 implementation is conservative and supports growth only within
preallocated headroom:

- current logical block count: `s_blkcnt`
- maximum bitmap-backed block count: `s_r_blkcnt`

`kafsresize` can grow only when `s_blkcnt < s_r_blkcnt` and target blocks do not exceed `s_r_blkcnt`.
It updates block bitmap bits for the newly exposed range and increments `s_blkcnt_free`.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --grow
Enable grow operation (shrink is not supported).
.TP
.B --migrate-create
Create a new destination image for migration using
.BR mkfs.kafs (8)
with inode count and target size.
When
.B --size-bytes
is omitted, size is auto-detected from
.B --dst-image
(block device capacity on Linux, or regular file size).
.TP
.B --size-bytes N
Target logical size in bytes (supports `K/M/G` suffixes).
For
.BR --migrate-create ,
this is optional and defaults to auto-detect from
.BR --dst-image .
.TP
.B --dst-image image
Destination image path used by
.BR --migrate-create .
.TP
.B --inodes I
Destination inode count for
.BR --migrate-create .
.TP
.B --journal-size-bytes N
Optional journal size forwarded to
.BR mkfs.kafs .
.TP
.B --blksize-log L
Optional log2 block size forwarded to
.BR mkfs.kafs .
.TP
.B --hrl-entry-ratio R
Optional HRL entry ratio forwarded to
.BR mkfs.kafs .
Valid range is greater than 0 and less than or equal to 1.0.
.TP
.B --src-mount PATH
Optional source mount path; printed in suggested rsync commands.
.TP
.B --dst-mount PATH
Optional destination mount path; printed in suggested mount/rsync commands,
including a final low-transfer rsync step.
.TP
.B --yes
Skip confirmation prompt for
.BR --migrate-create .
.TP
.B --force
Overwrite existing destination image for
.BR --migrate-create .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Resize succeeded.
.TP
.B 1
I/O, bounds, unsupported-headroom, or migration-create execution error.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR kafs (1),
.BR kafsctl (1),
.BR mkfs.kafs (8),
.BR fsck.kafs (8),
.BR kafsimage (8),
.BR kafsdump (8),
.BR kafs-info (8)
.SH AUTHOR
kafs project.
